Add fluids in WarpX (#3991)
ECP-WarpX/WarpX: Docs/source/theory/cold_fluid_model.rst

.. _theory-cold-fluid-model:

Cold Relativistic Fluid Model
==========================

> An alternate model for the plasma particle representation, is the cold relativistic fluid model.

Reviewer: Just to be slightly more explicit
```suggestion
An alternate to the representation of the plasma as macroparticles, is the cold relativistic fluid model.
```

Author: Added.

The cold relativistic fluid model is typically faster to compute than
particles and useful to replace particles when kinetic effects are negligble. This
can be done for certain parts of the plasma, such as the background plasma while leaving

> particle beams overlaid. The two models then couple through maxwells equations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
can be done for certain parts of the plasma, such as the background plasma, while still
representing particle beams as a group of macroparticles. The two models then couple through Maxwell's equations.
```

Author: Added.

> In the cold limit (zero internal pressure) of a relativistic plasma, the Maxwell-Fluid

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the cold limit (zero internal temperature and pressure) of a relativistic plasma, the Maxwell-Fluid
```

> equations govern the plasma evolution. The fluid equations in the lab frame per species,

Reviewer: My understanding is that these equations are Lorentz-invariant, and are therefore valid in any frame.
```suggestion
equations govern the plasma evolution. The fluid equations per species,
```

Author: True, I was meaning the simulation frame. But I just removed it to avoid confusion

>  s, are given by,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 `s`, are given by,
```

.. math::

   \frac{\partial N_s}{\partial t} + \nabla \cdot (N_s\mathbf{V}_s) &= 0 \\
   \frac{\partial (N\mathbf{U})_s}{\partial t} + \nabla \cdot ((N\mathbf{U})_s\mathbf{V}_s) &= \frac{q_sN_s}{m_s}(\mathbf{E}_s + \mathbf{V}_s \times \mathbf{B}_s).

Where the fields are updated via Maxwell's equations,

.. math::

   \nabla \cdot \mathbf{E} &= \frac{\rho}{\varepsilon_0} \\
   \nabla \cdot \mathbf{B} &= 0 \\
   \nabla \times \mathbf{E} &= -\frac{\partial \mathbf{B}}{\partial t} \\
   \nabla \times \mathbf{B} &= \mu_0 \mathbf{J} + \mu_0 \varepsilon_0 \frac{\partial \mathbf{E}}{\partial t}.

The fluids are coupled to the fields through,

.. math::

   \rho &= \rho_{ptcl}+\sum_s q_sN_s \\
   \mathbf{J} &= \mathbf{J}_{ptcl}+\sum_s q_sN_s\mathbf{V}_s \\

>    \mathbf{V}_s &= \frac{ (N\mathbf{U})_s }{ \sqrt{ N_s^2 + (N\mathbf{U})_s^2/c^2} } \\

Reviewer: Maybe it is more natural to write it like this:
```suggestion
   \mathbf{V}_s &= \frac{ \mathbf{U}_s }{ \sqrt{ 1+ \mathbf{U}_s^2/c^2} } \\
```

Author: I agree. Fixed.

   (N\mathbf{U})_s &= N_s\mathbf{U}_s

where the particle quantities are calculated by the PIC algorithm.

Implementation details

> -------------------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
----------------------
```

The fluid timeloop is embedded inside the standard PIC timeloop and consists of

> the following steps: 1. H&C push of the momentum 2. Non-inertial (momentum source)

Reviewer: Could you use bullet lists or ordered list in RST to format this different steps in a more visual way?
https://sublime-and-sphinx-guide.readthedocs.io/en/latest/lists.html#unordered-lists

Author: I expand on them below in the bulleted list, does that work? Here it was just sort of prepping the reader.

> the following steps: 1. H&C push of the momentum 2. Non-inertial (momentum source)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the following steps: 1. Higuera and Cary push of the momentum 2. Non-inertial (momentum source)
```

> terms 3. boundary conditions and and and MPI Communications 4. MUSCL

Reviewer: ```suggestion
terms (only in cylindrical geometry) 3. boundary conditions and MPI Communications 4. MUSCL
```

scheme for advection terms 5. Current and Charge Deposition. The figure here gives
a visual representation of these steps, and we describe each of these in more detail.

.. image:: Fluid_Loop.png
   :alt: Fluid Loop embedded within the overall PIC loop.

> Step 0: **Preperation**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Step 0: **Preparation**
```

    Before the fluid loop begins, it is assumed that the program is in the state where fields :math:`\mathbf{E}`

>     and :math:`\mathbf{B}` are available at the half timestep of the fluids. The

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    and :math:`\mathbf{B}` are available integer timestep. The
```

    fluids themselves are arrays on our nodal grid of the density and

>     momentum density, :math:`\mathbf{Q} \equiv \{ N, NU_x, NU_y, NU_z \}`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    fluids themselves are represented by arrays of fluid quantities (density and
    momentum density, :math:`\mathbf{Q} \equiv \{ N, NU_x, NU_y, NU_z \}`) known on a nodal grid and at half-integer timestep
```

> Step 1: **Higeura and Cary Push**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Step 1: **Higuera and Cary Push**
```

    The time staggering of the fields is used by the momentum source term, which is source-

>     split and solved with a the Higeura and Cary push (Higura et al, 2017). We do not adopt spatial

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    split and solved with a the Higuera and Cary push (Higuera et al, 2017). We do not adopt spatial
```

>     split and solved with a the Higeura and Cary push (Higura et al, 2017). We do not adopt spatial

Reviewer: At this point, the term "source-split" could be ambiguous to the reader, and is not necessary: you already showed that we do source splitting by outlining the different steps of the update.
```suggestion
    The time staggering of the fields is used by the momentum source term, which is solved with a the Higeura and Cary push (Higura et al, 2017). We do not adopt spatial
```

>     grid staggering, all discritized fluid quantities exist on the nodal grid. External fields

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    grid staggering, all discretized fluid quantities exist on the nodal grid. External fields
```

    can be included at this step.

> Step 2: **Non-interial Terms**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Step 2: **Non-inertial Terms**
```

>     In RZ, the diverence of the flux terms has aditional non-zero elements outside of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    In RZ, the divergence of the flux terms has additional non-zero elements outside of the
```

>     derivitives. These are Strang split and solved with a TVD RK3 method (Osher et al, 1988).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    derivatives. These are Strang split and solved with a TVD RK3 method (Osher et al, 1988).
```
Also: I feel like there is a little bit of jargon here that may not be familiar to typically PIC users (or even WarpX developers). What is the difference between TVD (mentioned here) and SPP (mentioned in the figure)?

Reviewer: Maybe RK3 could spelled out: "third-order Runge-Kutta"

Author: The TVD and SSP both mean the same thing here. I change this to be "These terms are Strang split and are time integrated via equation 2.18 from (Osher et al, 1988),  which is the SSP-RK3 integrator."

> Step 3: **Boundary Conditions and Comms**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Step 3: **Boundary Conditions and Communications**
```

>     At this point we apply BCs (copy BC for the fluids) and we exchange gaurd cells between

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    At this point, the code applies boundary conditions (assuming Neumann boundary conditions for the fluid quantities) and exchanges guard cells between
```

>     MPI ranks in preperation of derivative terms in the next advective step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    MPI ranks in preparation of derivative terms in the next step.
```

Step 4: **Advective Push**

>     For the advective term, we update this with a MUSCL scheme using low-diffusion minmod slope
>     limiting. We further simplify the conservative equations in terms of primitive

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    For the advective term, a MUSCL scheme using low-diffusion minmod slope
    limiting is used. We further simplify the conservative equations in terms of primitive
```

    variables, :math:`\{ N, U_x, U_y, U_z \}`. Which we found to be
    more stable than conservative variables for the MUSCL reconstruction. Once we've
    reconstructed the solution in the MUSCL scheme for teh half-timestep, we convert
    these quantities back to their conservative forms for the total update to maintain

>     the conservation laws.

Reviewer: I feel like the reader would have a hard time understanding this without equations. Maybe you can just stop at the first sentence, and then give a link/reference to the detail for this scheme.

Author: Done.

> Step 5: **Current and Charge Deposition**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Step 5: **Current and charge deposition**
```

    Once this series of steps is complete and the fluids have been evolved by an entire

>     timestep. We then deposit the current and charge onto the total current and charge

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    timestep, the current and charge is deposited onto the grid and added to the total current and charge
```

    densities.

> *Some extra notes:* The algorithm is safe with zero fluid density. It also implements a

Reviewer: Could you use this RST feature to make the note look pretty:
https://sublime-and-sphinx-guide.readthedocs.io/en/latest/notes_warnings.html

Author: Done!

positivity limiter on the density to prevent negative density regions from forming.

> There is currently no ability to mode-decompose in RZ, and none boundaries are handled by
> default.

Reviewer: Regarding the "none" boundary, I don't think that there are other physically-valid options, correct?
```suggestion
There is currently no ability to perform azimuthal mode decomposition in RZ.
```

> More details of the computations are given in an extended writeup (contact: grj@princeton.edu).

Reviewer: Would it be possible to have a version publicly available somewhere?

.. _theory-cold-fluid-model:

Cold Relativistic Fluid Model

> ==========================

Reviewer 2: Please balance the `=` with the title, rst is a bit picky.

Author: Added and opened a PR: https://github.com/ECP-WarpX/WarpX/pull/4330.

An alternate to the representation of the plasma as macroparticles, is the cold relativistic fluid model.
The cold relativistic fluid model is typically faster to compute than
particles and useful to replace particles when kinetic effects are negligible. This
can be done for certain parts of the plasma, such as the background plasma, while still
representing particle beams as a group of macroparticles. The two models then couple through
Maxwell's equations.

In the cold limit (zero internal temperature and pressure) of a relativistic plasma, the Maxwell-Fluid

> equations govern the plasma evolution. The fluid equations per species, `s`, are given by,

Reviewer 2: double backtick needed in rst to make a verbatim `s`

Author: Added and opened a PR: https://github.com/ECP-WarpX/WarpX/pull/4330.
